---
title: "Security Tools Research - Password Crackers and Jack the Ripper"
date: 2019-02-20T22:23:06+11:00
author: Cameron Wang
description: Research Task on Security Tools
---
# Password Cracking
## What is Password Cracking?

In the field of cyber security, password cracking is the process of obtaining passwords stored in data which is either stored, or transmitted from a computer system. One of the most common password cracking methods is through a brute force attack, which involves repeatedly inputting passwords in the hopes of eventually correctly guessing.
Other forms of password cracking include dictionary attacks, which is a type of brute force 
attack involving predetermined possible words, and word list substitution, which substitutes certain characters with others, such as characters to numbers.

John the Ripper and Hashcat are some of the software tools designed to perform password cracking.

## Effects and Impacts of Password Cracking

The main purpose of password cracking is for an attacker to gain unauthorised access onto a system, either by accessing other users or administrator accounts, allowing attackers to access data or privileges they should not have.

Although there are no guarantee precautions that can be taken to completely prevent password cracking, as the level of security is dependent on the strength of the user’s password, there are many security precautions that can be taken to mitigate attacks.

Developing a strong password policy on users can enforce the use of long and complex passwords to increase the difficulty and length of time to discover it in an attack.
Implementing multi-factor authentication systems can add an extra level of security, requiring multiple other forms of evidence besides a password to successfully verify a user’s identity. Two-factor authentication (2FA) is a form of multi-factor authentication commonly implemented in login systems, supplementing user-controlled passwords with a one-time password (OTP) or code generated by a device that only the user owns, such as a smartphone.
All stored password files should be encrypted with the strongest form of encryption available, rather than being stored in plaintext. A commonly used encryption method for encrypting passwords is hashing, due to its collision resistance, and difficulty to reverse.

## Examples of Password Cracking

### Defense Department Password Cracked in 9 Seconds

In 2018, a test team at the U.S. Department of Defense managed to crack the administrator’s password in 9 seconds, allowing the testers to take completely control of their systems undetected, due to lack of proper password management and unencrypted communications.

### Email Scam

In 2018, an attacker, using old passwords placed into the subject heading of the email, threatened victims for bitcoin by stating that their passwords were used to hack and record videos of the victim, which will be shown to the victim’s contacts.

# John the Ripper

## What is John the Ripper?

John the Ripper is a popular free and open source password cracking software, combining a multitude of password crackers into one package, as well as allowing customizable crackers.

## How It Works

John the Ripper is capable of running against various encrypted password formats, including crypt password hash types most commonly found on Unix, through its autodetection system of password hash types. John the Ripper targets the password hashes from /etc/passwd.

John the Ripper contains four different types of cracking modes: “Wordlist”, “Single Crack”, “Incremental”, and “External”. In “wordlist” mode, the software performs a dictionary attack, taking a wordlist (with one word per line) and password files. Mangling rules can be applied, modifying words to produce other potential passwords). “Single Crack” mode takes login names, “GECOS” / “Full Name” fields, and users’ home directory names as candidate passwords, whilst applying a large set of mangling rules. “Incremental” mode is the brute force method, and considered the most powerful cracking mode, as it tests all possible character combinations as passwords. The mode uses trigraph frequencies, separately for each character position and for each password length, to ensure that the possible amount of passwords are cracked within a limited time, due to the sheer amount of combinations. The final mode, “External”, allows the execution of C functions during cracking, by adding it into the configuration file.

# Bibliography

John the Ripper, Documentation, viewed on 18 February 2019
<https://www.openwall.com/john/doc/MODES.shtml>

John the Ripper, Documentation, viewed on 18 February 2019,
<https://www.openwall.com/john/doc/EXTERNAL.shtml>

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, John the Ripper - Documentation, viewed on 19 February 2019,  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_the_Ripper>

Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, Password Cracking - Documentation, viewed on 19 February 2019, 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Password_cracking>

From SearchSecurity, How to prevent password attacks and other exploits - Blog/Article, viewed on 19 February 2019,
<https://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/tip/How-to-prevent-password-attacks-and-other-exploits>

Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, Password Cracking - Documentation, viewed on 19 February 2019, 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-factor_authentication>

Livescience, Defense Department Password is Cracking in 9 seconds. So how Safe are US Weapons - Blog/Article, viewed on 19 February 2019,
<https://www.livescience.com/63841-defense-department-weapons-vulnerable-cyberattacks.html>

Tech Insider 2018, People are being victimized by a terrifying new email scam where attackers claim they stole your password and hacked your
webcam while you were watching porn — here's how to protect yourself, viewed 19 February 2019, <https://www.businessinsider.com.au/new-email-scam-uses-old-password-fake-porn-threats-webcam-video-bitcoin-2018-7?r=US&IR=T>

*Artefacts*:

Password Cracking Tools Presentation Slides - https://drive.google.com/open?id=19pyZex1FxaI0cgyVpWVL-kwV0NOk2zfj

Password Cracking Tools Presentation/Research Notes - https://drive.google.com/open?id=143EphJHPWsTkD6uwa90a5gieag-7jXR3